Good afternoon, everyone.
Welcome to session 182, which is Java:
Getting the Best Performance.
And here to begin our
presentation this afternoon,
please welcome Jim Laskey.
Good afternoon.
We're going to talk a little
bit about performance.
Yesterday we talked a little bit
about some of the new technology that
was being introduced on Mac OS X,
in particular,
Hotspot and some of Java 2.
We're going to focus on different
aspects of these two technologies,
but we're trying to
zero in on performance,
and we're going to talk about
how we've made improvements
to performance in the Java VM.
We're going to give you some hints
or ideas about how you can modify
your code to gain performance.
We've broken this talk up into
three parts because we wanted to
get three different categories
of things to talk about.
The first part will be done
by Ivan Posva of the VM team,
who's going to talk about the VM,
the new memory management,
thread synchronization.
Then I'll come back for part two
and talk about code execution and
how we boosted performance of code.
Finally,
John Berkey will come up and discuss how
we can get some performance out of the
AWT and swing in the new Java classes.
I guess I'll get Ivan to come up now.
Well, thanks Jim for the introduction.
So let's look at first what are
the factors of Java performance.
First of all,
it's the design of your application
that's the most important part of that.
Second is the speed of the
bytecode execution inside the VM,
the speed at which we execute
the bytecodes of your program.
Next, and that's what I will focus about,
is speed of VM operations,
be it class loading, garbage collection,
threading, synchronization,
and its associated libraries.
And last, it's the speed of the hardware
you're running on and the
underlying operating system.
That's not much we can do about it,
but we are pressing on the
kernel team in that area.
[Transcript missing]
Automatic memory management
and language level support for
threading and synchronization.
Unfortunately,
these two points are also associated with
having the most impact on performance,
most negative impact on performance.
And we are here to clean up some of those
misconceptions and show you what you can
do to give the VM hints in that area.
[Transcript missing]
: The less memory you use,
it can be a considerable gain.
So I will -- the hotspot VM uses a
generational copying garbage collector,
and on the next slide I will
dive into a bit more detail.
: So, it is accurate.
The garbage collector is accurate,
which means we know at all times
in the executing Java program,
we know at all times where we
have life references to objects.
We are not conservative when
we walk through the stack,
so we know
: What words on the stack are
actual integers even though they
look like object references?
We can collect those objects.
In contrast to the
: Conservative collectors,
this can really make a big difference
in memory usage in the sense that
you're not keeping live objects that
are apparent objects but you actually
: It is generational,
which means the majority of
objects that you allocate in
Java when you actually study it,
they are very short lived.
So what we do,
we allocate all the objects
in this new object heap,
what we call the nursery.
And once we exhausted this nursery,
we copy the surviving objects out
of there into an old space and can
start from scratch in that nursery.
Which means we have a fast
allocation in this nursery.
We don't have to deal with the garbage we
We have in there,
we don't do anything with the garbage.
We just copy out the objects
that survive from this new
generation to the old generation.
You could say that garbage collection
is actually the wrong term.
It's more like a search and rescue
operation where you rescue the
few survivors out of the new heap,
out of the nursery, into the old space.
It is also a search where we,
due to the accurate nature,
we know exactly who's surviving.
So the search is pretty fast.
I say, I mentioned copying.
We actually move those objects out of
the nursery into separate memory area.
Studies have shown that
: The first thing I want to say is
that 5-10% of allocated objects survive
from the new allocation space from
the nursery into the old generation.
So if you say this nursery
is half a megabyte big,
we copy 25-50 kilobytes worth of objects,
which is not very much.
Also, since we have this copying
infrastructure already in place
for this rather big object space,
we compact it regularly.
Every time we run the
old space collector,
we can compact the heap and keep
the memory usage to a minimum.
: The old space collector also,
since it has to deal with much
bigger memory allocations,
is incremental, so it's...
It works on a chunk at a time,
every time it's invoked,
so it reduces user perceivable
pauses so you don't have this
big stop in the middle where
you're collecting the whole heap,
but you have these many,
many small pauses which makes
your UI applications or server
applications respond much faster.
So the benefits to you as a
programmer are very fast allocation.
Since we always allocate
out of this nursery,
and we allocate in a stack-like fashion,
so all we do is increment the
pointer and this is our new object.
All we have to do after we increment
the pointer is check if we exhausted
the nursery space and then we have
to trigger this new space collection.
This...
This allocation code is actually
inlined in the compiled code.
All we have to do is to allocate a new
object when you have the new operation.
This is equivalent to 11 instructions.
When you compare that to, say,
a C-style malloc function call,
you have to go through
cross-library function glue,
and then you have to do
the C prolog to allocate.
After those 11 instructions,
you're not even allocating
objects in the C language yet,
versus in Java, you have your object
and you're ready to go.
As I mentioned before,
we have an accurate collector,
so we do aggressive reclamation
of this nursery as well
as of the old generations.
So, for example,
you don't leave objects around
that are not accessible anymore.
And due to these two factors,
you have essentially
free temporary objects.
Temporary objects are by
definition short-lived,
which we don't have to deal with.
You have no overhead for
short-lived objects because all
we have to do is basically copy
the few survivors out of there.
So, I claim you have essentially
free temporary objects,
especially since Java is multithreaded.
If you have an allocation cache,
you would have to lock that
allocation cache first.
You would have to take the object out
of the allocation cache and then unlock.
By that time, you already allocated the
object out of the nursery.
What do you need to do?
Well, as I mentioned,
you do not build allocation caches,
but what you also have to do
is you have to tell the VM that
you're done with an object.
So what you have to do is,
if you have an object here
that you don't need anymore,
or even worse,
if you have an object hierarchy,
especially if you have
it in a static field,
you have to set that value,
that reference to null,
so we know this object hierarchy or
this object is not reachable anymore,
so we don't copy it out
into the old generation.
Or even worse,
if it's in the old generation,
we keep compacting it and so on.
We keep that memory alive.
So what you have to make sure
that you null out your objects
that you're not using anymore.
And while I mentioned allocation caches,
what you also have to do
is if you have native code,
be it stub-based libraries
based on the old native call
conventions from Java 1.0,
JDK 1.0.2, or Java 1.1.
Or if you have in your project,
if you have JDIRECT2 code, you have to...
- Basically,
convert those projects to use JDIRECT3.
There is a talk tomorrow
about Mac OS X Java in depth,
and that talks about how to
convert projects to JDIRECT3.
Or you have to convert your native
stub libraries to use JNI native calls.
And if you're using the
Objective-C to Java bridge for
: When you're wrapping
Objective-C frameworks to Java,
then you have to make sure that
you recompile your wrapper projects
with the new JNI-based bridge
that comes with DP4 on the CD.
Before I go into synchronization,
I wanted to mention that
Java threads are one-to-one mapped
to P threads and therefore are also
one-to-one mapped to kernel threads.
They are fully preemptive.
which means we inside the VM or you,
we do not have to deal with scheduling.
The kernel does that for us.
We are multi-processing
ready as you've seen in the
hardware keynote this morning.
If
If we have something that the
kernel can use to schedule
more threads onto a second CPU,
we in the VM will make use of that.
Therefore, your applications will run
faster naturally as well.
We integrated native and Java stacks
for invocation stacks into one memory
area so you have better locality
of references as VM internals.
This is not something you will notice,
but this is one of the reasons
why you have to go to JNI,
for example,
as well as the Accurate Garbage Collector
makes it necessary to go to JNI.
So, my last slide is on synchronization.
First I wanted to explain,
when we talk about synchronization
what is a contended case.
A contended case is when you're executing
in one thread a synchronized block,
be it a synchronized method or,
if you do execute a synchronized
statement on a particular object,
you're, inside that call,
inside that block,
and a different thread comes in
and tries to do a synchronized
block on the same object.
So, at that time,
it is called that you have
contention on that object,
and
The uncontended case, therefore,
is if you have one thread go in,
synchronize in a particular object,
execute the whole block,
and exit the synchronized block
without any other thread trying
to synchronize in the same object.
The studies have shown that the
contended case is very rare.
In those instances we use Pthread
primitives and kernel primitives to
make sure that we do the right thing
of blocking the thread so it doesn't
use any CPU cycles from then on.
But what is much more important is
that we have very fast synchronization
in the uncontended case.
What you have basically is
a constant time overhead.
You have a couple of instructions
to make sure that you set
up that synchronized block.
We do not allocate memory
on the heap or anything.
It's all stack allocated for that memory,
basically for that synchronized
block we allocated inside
the invocation of that stack.
Most important of all,
we don't use any OS resources,
so we don't use any kernel resources,
we don't make any pthread calls,
we don't make any kernel calls,
which is important since we want
this constant time overhead.
So, I will hand the podium back to Jim to
talk about Java code execution.
I want to try to focus on basically
what we've done to improve
performance in code generation.
But I want to give you some background.
So we're going to go into a
little bit of history first and
then talk about optimization.
And then at the end I have
ten slides which are what I'm
calling code generator hints,
which are things that you can
do in your code which the code
generator can look at and say,
"Oh,
this means I can do this optimization."
And hopefully you can pick up a few of
those things and put it in your own code.
[Transcript missing]
: Now interpretation can carry us so far,
but it's really not the end game.
And what we need to be able to do at
that point is to get into some kind
of native code generation so that
we get down to the point where we're
actually running at the same sorts
of speed that you would see in C++.
So we get into code generators and
we had the first JITs that came out
use the Java lane compiler interface
as a plug-in to the classic VM.
And what they did was intercept
the execution of methods and go
through and convert the bytecodes
into native machine code.
And a lot of the earlier JITs
that came out basically all they
really did was take the bytecode
sequence and convert them one to
one into sequences of native code.
That worked and again you got
another boost of performance.
You probably got about a five
times boost in performance.
But the problem is it wasn't
really utilizing the true
performance of the machine.
It wasn't scheduling the instructions.
It wasn't looking at the sequences
of instructions and whether you
could get any kind of optimization.
: So then we got a round of static
code generators where people
would take the back end off of a
C compiler and put a Java front end
in and produce static executed code.
And that sort of works for
some types of applications,
but the problem with that is
that Java is a very rich and
dynamic environment to work in,
and static applications don't really fit
into what the spirit of Java is about.
You need that dynamic
environment to run in.
So then we get into the high
performance JITs and you're
familiar with say the semantic
JIT that we've been using in MRJ.
There's a couple of other high
performance JITs like the C2 or the
server compiler that's on hotspot.
And what these JITs would do is basically
optimize the heck out of the bytecode
and try to reduce it down to something
that would be quite close to what you
would expect from a C and a C++ compiler.
The problem with these
high performance JITs,
well the positive part is that we're
getting the really good performance,
really, really good performance.
But the problem with these was
that there was a lot of competition
between the JIT companies and they
were trying to squeeze out as much
performance as they possibly could,
try to get the best caffeine mark
they could working with the semantic
JIT on the semantic JIT team.
We were getting infinite scores and
caffeine marks because we were optimizing
methods right down to the point where
they were just simple return statements.
: But the problem is,
that's the positive side,
the negative side is that it was
taking more and more time to compile
these things and more and more memory.
And that's where the cost was.
So we have to find some kind of balance
between getting the optimization done
and keeping the compile time and the
memory requirements down to a minimum.
And that's where we are
with hotspot client version.
The traditional type of
optimizations you would expect
would be expression reduction,
CSEs,
loop unfolding or loop optimizations,
data flow analysis.
These are all the standard sort of
things you would see in the Dragon book,
I guess the standard compiler book.
And typically what would happen would
be that you would go through a round of
these optimizations and then they would
reduce the application down to a little
bit smaller and then you would have to
go back and repeat them again because
then it would bring it down again.
So we have a Heuristic type algorithm
to actually reduce the optimization.
And this is really where a lot of these
high end optimizers got into trouble
was because they would loop and loop and
loop and they could loop several hundred
times before they give up and say,
well this is the best
I can do with this method.
And then actually actually
get the best performance.
Executed.
One of the great things about the
Just-In-Time compiler is that you can
do optimizations that you wouldn't
be able to do in a static situation.
One of the most important ones is
to be able to determine whether a
virtual method is monomorphic or not.
What this means,
what monomorphism is about,
is that we have in Java the ability to
create subclasses of a particular method,
and then the ability to be
able to override those methods.
So in order to call a particular
method with a particular object,
there's a dispatch that goes
on that says which method is
associated with this object.
So there's basically virtual objects,
a virtual dispatch.
But most of the time,
and it turns out that
in most applications,
a little bit over 80% of the
classes that you have in your
environment are not overridden.
They're leaf classes.
So there's really no need to go
through this dispatch mechanism.
You can make a direct call to that
method and not worry about having to,
you know, hitting the wrong method.
So the just-in-time compilers
try to exploit this,
and one of the things that
you can do besides just,
you know,
simplifying the actual call to the
method is inline the code for the
method that you're dispatching to.
If you take a look at some of
the examples of your own code,
you'll probably find lots of places
where you're calling this method.
It's rather simple,
maybe a few lines of code.
A good example of those
would be the accessors,
the getters and setters for your class.
Isn't it a shame I have to go
off and call this method because
this code could fit in right in
line and be very inexpensive?
This is what the JIT does for you.
It goes off and says, "Oh,
that's a really simple method.
I can determine that it's monomorphic.
There's nobody overriding this,
so I'm just going to inline
this code in." And the code
becomes very inexpensive.
Now, there's always the possibility
that that method may get
overloaded or not overloaded but
overridden at some other time.
So what will happen in the
Just-In-Time compiler environment
is that it may create several
flavors of the same method.
So you may have several different
versions of that method,
one where maybe a call is overloaded
or overridden and another case
where it isn't overridden.
So what happens is that the method that
needs to be executed will be chosen at
runtime and will go off and do that code
or whichever one suits the situation.
: Also, I should make a point,
and this is another great advantage
of just-in-time compilers,
is that we can do processor-specific
optimizations at runtime.
The great beauty of Java is that I can
take this bytecode and port it to any
machine and have it run on that machine.
While even on the same general
architecture like the PowerPC,
I can get different kind of optimization
on a G3 than I would on a G4 because
of scheduling and so on and so forth.
So the types of things that you could
do would be to say on the PowerPC I can
use mask and shift operations,
or if I'm running on a G4 I can
use a velocity engine instructions.
So I can do that on the fly.
And then I can do instruction scheduling.
And once I've done that,
on a particular machine,
I can run it on the G4.
: And then I can do
instruction scheduling.
And once I've done that,
on a particular machine,
I can run it on the G4.
: And then I can do
instruction scheduling.
And once I've done that,
on a particular machine,
I can run it on the G4.
or a particular machine
that I'm running on,
I can cache the code that I've generated.
The next time I go and execute it,
I'm going to use that cache code.
I don't have to recompile it.
That code has already been tailored
for the machine it's running on.
What gets compiled?
There are probably all kinds of
myths out there about all these
magic heuristics that we use to
figure out what method gets executed.
There are some truths and rumors,
but generally the things that do get
compiled into native machine code are
primarily methods that have loops.
and methods that have been
interpreted n number of times.
Those are the two primary triggers
that trigger whether something gets
converted to native code or not.
A method that has a loop may get
executed once in the interpreter,
but then each successive time that
it may get converted to native
code and get run as native code.
The triggers for n number of times,
I said n number of times
because different JITs
trigger at different levels.
Like hotspot triggers at around
1500 executions before it actually
goes and converts to native.
But that fluctuates depending
on different kinds of criteria.
What doesn't get compiled
are typically things that,
say, if you have a method
that's currently running,
and it's looping and
calling other things,
and it seems to be
looping for a long time.
If it didn't meet the original loop
criteria and didn't get compiled,
it may sit there and
continue as an interpreter.
This is something that would
require on-stack replacement.
In the current version of Hotspot,
we don't have that in place yet.
But you should be able to replace,
eventually we'll be able
to replace something that's
currently being interpreted with
something that's been compiled.
But that doesn't prevent that
method from being compiled.
What happens is that if that
method is being called by any
other point in your application,
then it will use the compiled
version of it because it's already
been triggered to be compiled.
Class initializers typically don't
get compiled because of the fact
that they're only executed once.
They usually do the initialization
of their statics and create
whatever things that they need.
They don't need to go beyond that.
So they typically don't get compiled.
Finally,
things that are written in Java assembler
that are very convoluted in their go-to
structures and whatnot where it's really
hard to do the analysis of that code.
We can't generate native code for them.
We may try,
but it's typically not worth the trouble.
The only time I've ever run into
that really is with the JCK.
There's a lot of the JCK tests
that try to see what you can
do to trip up on the JIT.
So, that's the first thing.
So you don't typically
have to worry about that.
Okay, so now I have ten hints or
things that you can do that you
can provide the code generator,
provide to the code generator that
will actually help your performance.
There's various degrees of
performance improvement here.
Some may be a little bit
more dramatic than others,
but you don't need to use them all and
you don't necessarily have to go out
and feel that you have to use them all.
They're just ideas that you can
keep in the back of your mind
when you're trying to tune your
application at the end of your cycle.
The first and probably the most
important thing is to write
small and concise methods.
Try to avoid methods that have
2,000 lines of code in them because
what happens is that when the
just-in-time compiler kicks in,
it's got to compile the whole thing.
And maybe you're only going to use
a couple of lines of it because
you've got this big case statement
and there's maybe two lines in it.
One of them is going to get executed
most of the time and the other ones
may get compiled or run very rarely.
So what you should try to do
is to try to keep them small so
that they'll compile quickly.
And then if you've got some code
that's not going to be used very often,
move that code into separate
routines so that if it's necessary,
they'll be compiled then
but otherwise move them off.
Don't worry about your method
being too small because method
inlining will take care of that.
The JIT will figure out the nice load
balance to get a nice size routine
and what inlines nicely and so on.
So don't worry about
the size of the thing.
It's not important.
That's not crucial.
All right.
: The method is too simple.
Finally,
you should always remember that accessor
methods are almost always in line.
Even in the classic interpreter,
the accessor methods were often in line.
It's good to use accessor methods
instead of accessing the fields directly.
The next hint is to
trust the supply classes.
What we try to do is look
for hot spots in your code,
things that take a long time
and try to gain performance.
One of the things we do in our
analysis is identify methods
that get executed a lot.
We want to try to tune those so
that they execute very quickly.
Often we tune them
directly into assembler.
Methods in the class string
and string buffer vector,
which are used a lot,
we actually have intrinsic or built-in
methods to deal with a lot of those
situations so you get better performance.
If you think you can write
it better than Sun did,
just remember that maybe we're
going to do it a little bit
better for you in the background.
That's just something to keep in mind.
Array copy is something
we gain performance on.
If you're running on a G4,
hopefully we'll be able to get this.
This is not currently in place.
But if you're array copy running on a G4,
use the velocity engine
to help with the copy.
And sine and cosine and tan.
On Intel, you would call the hardware
directly to do those.
We call the library directly so you
don't actually go through the glue.
So it's a bit of a
performance improvement.
We don't have 64-bit architecture,
so there is a cost in using lawns.
If you don't really need longs,
you're just doing it because you think
you might need the precision later,
then we'll maybe rethink it a little bit
and go back to using straight integers.
Long multiply takes five instructions.
Long divide has to call a subroutine.
A shift operation may
take several instructions.
So it's not as simple as just saying
long and things are going to work well.
There's lots of techniques to
get around some of the problems
you might have with longs.
I did a class library that handles
the situation where you're trying
to use longs that deal with the
unsigned integer problem when
you want to do unsigned compares.
There's a way of actually doing that
without having to resort to long.
Floats vs.
Doubles Floats are smaller
and take up less memory.
In most circumstances,
floats and doubles have
equivalents in execution.
But there are some
circumstances like divide,
where divide of a double
is actually twice as long,
or almost twice as long, as a float.
So if you don't really
need the precision,
stick with float.
Another reason why I'm recommending
using float is that as we
progress to the velocity engine,
the velocity engine
doesn't support doubles,
it only supports floats.
So if you're thinking about
declaring an array of doubles,
see if you can use an
array of floats instead,
because then that's most likely
what we'll be able to use to,
or what we'll apply
the velocity engine to.
There's no commitment to that,
but just keep that in mind.
Try to avoid the use of generic types.
It costs actually to
use these generic types,
especially when you're doing
assignments between the generic
type to a specific type.
Because the VM has to do a type check
to make sure that it's valid to do that.
And it does that type check at runtime.
And it may have to search up the
class hierarchy in order to determine
whether that's a member or not.
Okay, so that's just something
that you should keep in mind.
Especially when you're doing
assignments from a generic
type array to a specific array.
Because that means that even
if you're doing an array copy,
it has to validate everything that's
being moved from that array over.
Okay, it has to go through a class check.
So, try to use subclassing and method
overloading as much as you can.
Because that will actually be better
in the long run than actually -- and
then using one -- let's say writing
one routine that has a generic type.
And then doing an instance
of check inside of it.
It's better to do the
overloading of the methods.
Copy the local values.
Some of the optimizers in the JITs will
actually do this optimization for you,
but it's better for the interpreter,
it's better for the lower-end JITs and
so on and so forth to have you move
it out and work with that copy and
then step it back in if you need to.
: In this particular example,
the example on the left-hand side,
we have the increment of
the index -- or sorry,
extracting the value from the table,
increment the value, check to see if the
value has exceeded 100,
and then reset it to zero if it has.
Every time you have that index,
it's going to have to do
an array balance check.
: Again, the higher level optimizers will
take care of that and move that out,
but you can't rely on that.
So it's probably a good idea to
move it into a separate entity.
The other thing is there's a semantic
issue there where if there's another
thread that goes and changes that
field or changes that array entry,
you don't know which
copy you're going to get.
So if you extract the copy,
work with that copy and
step it back in again,
you know exactly which
value you're dealing with.
In a situation where you have multiple
threads that are accessing something,
you should use volatile if
you're not using synchronization.
Volatile is a little bit cheaper
than synchronization because what
it says is you need to reload that
value every time you access it.
And if volatile is not there,
then what will happen is a
highly optimizing JIT will say,
"Oh, well I've got this value.
I don't have to reload it." But then
meanwhile another thread changes
the value and you're sitting
there in your loop waiting for
it to change and it won't change.
So use the word volatile when you've got
global values that are being changed.
: Final, we've had a lot of discussion
internally about these at final,
but
It's one of my favorite words as far
as just-in-time compiling is concerned
because it gives me a lot of hints about
what the class can be or what kinds of
optimizations I can do on the class.
But it's something that
you don't need to overuse.
Write your applications and if you
feel that the class is not going to
ever be overridden for any reason,
for instance, your application class,
if it's not going to be overridden,
declare it as being final.
And what this wins you is the fact
that it says all of the methods in
this class can now be monomorphic.
They'll never be overridden.
I can make direct calls so it
improves the performance of the calls.
It also says that if I do an
instance of on that class,
all I have to do is compare it to
see if it's equal to the class.
So if I have the class string,
which is declared as final,
then the check to see if that
is a string is a simple compare
to see if the classes are equal.
I don't have to search up the
class hierarchy in order to
find out what's going on there.
Amen.
The other use of FINAL, of course,
is on statics.
And this says, this value is constant.
It's not going to change.
So once the Just-In-Time compiler
knows that it's constant,
it'll just grab it and say, okay,
I've got this.
I can apply it to
optimizations in the code.
And in this code sequence,
what I can gain here is that
I know that the allocation of that
character array is a fixed size.
So all I have to do is increment the
allocation pointer by a fixed size.
Boom, I've got my array declared.
And in the loop,
I know that it's a fixed size loop,
or the loop is going to go
iterate a fixed number of times,
in this case 32.
So I can actually get rid of
the loop and maybe do a blanket
initialization of that array to spaces.
So, Thank you.
If you have a choice between
declaring virtual class
hierarchy or using interfaces,
you'll get better performance
from virtual calls than you
will through interface calls.
That's because a virtual call
requires a simple index into an
array to get the address of the
method that you want to call.
Where an interface requires an actual
search of the class to make sure we
find the implementer of the class and
then it does an index into an array.
So there's a little bit of overhead.
Now in Hotspot they're very
clever where they've actually
cached the last instruction or
the last method that you've called
from a particular call point.
So it's a little bit better in Hotspot,
but it still has to go through a
verification to make sure that,
well, it really is an instance of that
class that is being passed through.
Limit the use of JNI and JDirect.
Initially when I wanted to do this talk,
I wanted to convey to you that
if you feel you can do it,
get better performance out of C,
you should probably really rethink it
a little bit and think that Java is
the way to actually write your code.
Try to avoid going off and
doing things if you can.
Because the optimization levels
that you're going to get in
Java will be pretty close to C,
if not better,
depending on which kind of level
of optimization that you're doing.
When you're using JNI,
there's a translation layer
that has to take place.
You can translate into the system.
And then coming back again,
you have to actually do a lookup of
the method in order to find out which
method to call back into the VM.
So use Java as much as possible.
Subtitles by the Amara.org community
In conclusion, I just want to repeat
what Yvonne said earlier.
The best thing, first of all,
is to make sure that your
application has a good design.
Once you have a good design,
go back and look at places where
you need to improve performance.
We didn't talk about performance
tools here yet because we're not
really finished with them yet.
Hotspot is actually released with -XPROF,
which will give you a profile of the
methods that have been executed and what
percentage of time you spent in there.
As we go along,
we're going to have better tools.
There's H-PROF tools that will
give you much more detailed
reports on performance.
Get a good design of your application,
then go back and start tweaking it and
maybe apply a few of these hints so that
you can get the Just-In-Time compiler
to produce better code for you.
Okay?
John.
Oops.
So hi,
I'm John Burkey and I'm on the AWT team.
And I'm gonna talk about a little
bit different side of performance
and that's how we can work
together to improve performance,
specifically from the framework level.
A lot of what you just heard is
about how to write good methods
and good classes yourselves,
but from the AWT's perspective,
we're more concerned with just
highlighting a few things that
will help you use our frameworks,
actually JavaScript's frameworks,
our implementation of Sun's frameworks.
So anyway, the five major areas I'm
gonna cover are here.
: I'm going to go ahead
and start the presentation.
I don't need to read them.
Basically, you'll see it's a lot of
usage pattern kind of stuff.
So for image creation,
the main thing is there's a new call
in Java 2 called get compatible image.
And for all the 1.1 usage,
specifically swing and the kinds of
things that are in the toolkit class,
we'll automatically take
care of this for you.
And what this will do is,
depending on the decisions we make
based on device depth and stuff,
we'll make sure that
it's the optimum image.
Most users of image don't need
to do anything other than this.
And if you do need to dive into bit
style manipulation of the image,
then number one, check,
make sure you really want to do that,
and then go into the imaging classes and
be real careful about the ones you pick.
One of the cases here is that there
are some image types on Windows,
for example,
that aren't as common on Mac,
and so they may not
perform as you expected.
So that's the kind of
thing you want to notice.
And again, so get compatible image is
definitely your first choice.
The next thing is this thing
called rendering hints.
And if you have a graphics object,
you can both get the list of
default hints and also set your own.
And the basic idea is that with Java 2,
there's an ability to do a
lot of really nice graphics.
You can do anti-aliased text,
anti-aliased permutants.
You can do image splitting with
different kinds of convolutions
and do really high-quality work.
But the fact is,
for a lot of what we do today,
including most of our normal
GUI framework operations,
we don't need quite the quality.
So that's why, for example,
a lot of these will be defaulted to
lower quality on the implementations
for like when Swing uses it.
And that's also because a lot of times,
in GUI framework building,
anti-aliasing can get in
the way and cause fuzziness.
And I'm sure you have examples
of that in your own experience.
So the key here is that we haven't
actually fine-tuned all this
stuff yet in our implementation.
But what I recommend is that
first you get familiar with
these and experiment with them,
understand the different ones.
I'll explain them in a sec here.
And then as we moved towards shipping,
you try these again with our
final candidates because you will
start to experience differences.
This is really important for us
because we can make serious changes
in the way implementation does
things when we're in fast mode.
So rendering is a key.
I actually deleted off the front
of these int key underscore,
but they're in this
sun.awt.sunhands class.
And so rendering is a key
that you can pass into.
There's a little hash map,
and you can say basically
quality or fast.
Anti-aliasing you can turn on and
off for both primitives and text.
That's why there's two of them there.
Fractional metrics is the ability to...
specified sub-pixel positions for text.
One thing I'll note here, too,
is there's a new way
to do text in Java 2,
which is glyph vectors.
And it is the highest
performance way to do text.
Don't assume that you can make the
-- do those kinds of things yourself.
And if you really are doing text stuff,
you want to see high quality and speed,
look at the way the swing
examples do this stuff before
you go and write your own.
Because they're using glyph vectors and
that is the fastest way to do the text.
So fractional metrics comes up
because there's an additional cost
with doing sub-pixel positioning of
your letters on your text rendering.
So dithering,
there's a couple different choices there.
Again, it's quality versus speed.
Interpolation,
there's bilinear bicubic and
that's for your image blitting.
Basically your image will look a little
better when it's scaled to different
sizes if you use the higher quality ones.
But it's slower.
So keep that in mind.
Alpha And color rendering, same thing,
color speed.
So bitmap manipulation,
this is pretty key for our platform.
We're optimizing first to make swing
apps and normal usage apps fast.
What that means is we actually are
not gonna use the same data buffer
types internally that are used
on the Windows implementation,
and that's because then we can do
hardware accelerated blitz between
our off screens and our screen.
And so in order for us to do that,
we have a different
implementation class under there,
so don't assume that you can type unsaved
cast down to specific data buffer types.
They won't be down there.
So at least look, do an instance of,
you can create the other
types and they will work,
but they will be slower.
So just be careful.
Again, this next one's kind of obvious,
but there's a whole bunch of
APIs that are in the new imaging
stuff that are useful for some
high quality advanced imaging stuff
and they were developed with some,
developers with that name,
but they're not as
useful for typical case.
So I'm calling it low
call frequency methods.
The point is that unreadable
raster and buffered image,
there's two basic ways to do things,
and that's, this is the ones that I think
are good for a typical case,
and it's basically,
you can pass in a whole rect of
whatever size you want of pixels
to push between your bitmaps,
your rasters.
And this is better because you can
control the frequency of call operation,
for the number of pixels you want to do.
So for example, if you want to drink
RAM and you've got it,
you can basically have a full
copy that gets pushed across
and make one call to copy.
Or if you want to go
all the way their way,
I would recommend at
the lowest per scanline,
you can say make a
method call per scanline.
That's much better than these for speed,
which exist in the API,
but you want to be aware,
and that's where you basically
make a method call per pixel.
shooting yourself in
the foot in most cases.
: So double buffering,
this is kind of interesting.
So on Mac OS X we double buffer all
Carbon windows right now in most cases.
So what that means is since your
app's already double buffered,
and we'll take care of
flushing that up efficiently,
if you want to have the
effect of double buffering,
use the swing stuff because
on Windows that stuff
will be double buffered,
and on our platform you'll
still just be double buffered.
Whereas, if you create your own
Java image and draw into that,
which is really easy to do in
Java as most of you know I'm sure,
and then blip that image you'll
actually be triple buffered on Mac OS X,
which is kind of wasteful.
So again, we take care of the swing.
So what I do in the case where I want
to implement this is I just go ahead
and use the swing stuff and use Jpanel,
etc.
and then it'll all just be taken care of.
: So this is another
issue from ECOWAS 10.
It's performance related.
Basically, the hard work of doing live
window resizing is yours,
the app developers.
We'll make, of course,
all the primitive stuff fast, but
When you do live window sizing,
suddenly component.paint
actually has to be fast,
right?
Because it's going to be
called every time you move the
little bottom of the window.
So if your code can't handle that,
you'll either have real
chunky performance when
you're moving the window.
It'll act funny, like you have a low
frame rate or something,
and the mouse will become unresponsive.
Or what you can do is do some
kind of threaded rendering.
So the case,
some cases are like JPEG loading,
where you show what you got, don't wait.
Or if you've got just a
real complicated image,
maybe you just pass over and do
some kind of simple version of that.
And queue up a thread that
does the rest of the work.
And then at that point,
if it's real complicated like that,
maybe you would use double,
another buffer.
In fact, be triple buffered,
but draw to an image
and then do it later.
That gets a little more complicated
because then as the size changes,
maybe you want to sample and draw images.
And then scale.
I can talk to people afterwards if
there's specific examples for that.
The main thing I want to point
out is that with live resizing,
your paint is going to be called a lot.
And so it needs to be as
fast as you can make it.
So I guess that's all for my slides.
I guess I really don't have much to
say as far as the summary is concerned,
but the environment that
you'll be working in is a
little bit different than MRJ.
And there are going to be some different
things that you may have spent a lot of
time trying to get performance on in MRJ.
They're going to be a little bit
different when you get to Mac OS X.
So hopefully we've sort of covered a
broad enough area that you keep these
things in mind when you're working.
So I guess I'm going to get Alan to
come up and coordinate a Q&A session.
We've got time.